>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER, 5:
NEW GAINS BY ISIS IN IRAQ,
DESPITE AIRSTRIKES BY THE UNITED
STATES AND ITS ALLIES.
A LEADING EXPERT WEIGHS IN.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT: THE
WAVE OF BEHEADINGS.
IT'S EVEN MORE WIDESPREAD THAN
THE RECENT COVERAGE SUGGESTS.
AND A NEW PUSH TO INCREASE THE
MINIMUM WAGE.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE HEAD OF THE CENTERS FOR
DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
TODAY OFFERED NEW REASSURANCES
THAT EBOLA DOES NOT POSE A GREAT
RISK TO AMERICANS.
>> HERE IN THE U.S. I REMAIN
QUITE CONFIDENT WE WILL NOT HAVE
A WIDESPREAD OUTBREAK.
WE WILL STOP IT IN ITS TRACKS,
BECAUSE WE'VE GOT INFECTION
CONTROL IN HOSPITALS AND PUBLIC
HEALTH THAT TRACKS AND ISOLATES
PEOPLE IF THEY GET SYMPTOMS.
IN AFRICA THE STORY IS
DIFFERENT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE C.D.C. HAS
INVESTIGATED MORE THAN 100 EBOLA
SCARES IN 33 STATES IN JUST THE
FIRST FOUR DAYS OF THIS MONTH.
MEANWHILE, AN NBC NEWS CAMERAMAN
WHO WAS DIAGNOSED WITH EBOLA IN
LIBERIA LAST WEEK IS HEADED BACK
TO THE U.S.
ASHOKA MUKPO WILL RECEIVE
TREATMENT AT AN OMAHA, NEBRASKA,
HOSPITAL.
IN MASSACHUSETTS, DOCTOR RICHARD
SACRA, WHO PREVIOUSLY RECOVERED
FROM EBOLA, IS BACK IN THE
HOSPITAL WITH A RESPIRATORY
INFECTION.
HIS PHYSICIAN SAID IT'S
APPARENTLY UNRELATED TO EBOLA.
AND THOMAS ERIC DUNCAN, THE
LIBERIAN MAN WHO BECAME ILL WITH
THE VIRUS IN DALLAS, REMAINS IN
CRITICAL CONDITION AT A TEXAS
HOSPITAL.
PRESIDENT OBAMA HONORED THE
NATION'S WOUNDED SERVICEMEN AND
SERVICEWOMEN DURING THE
UNVEILING OF A DISABLED VETERANS
MEMORIAL IN WASHINGTON TODAY.
>> THIS MEMORIAL IS A CHALLENGE
TO ALL OF US, A REMINDER OF THE
OBLIGATIONS THIS COUNTRY IS
UNDER.
IF WE ARE TO TRULY HONOR THESE
VETERANS WE MUST HEED THE VOICES
THAT SPEAK TO US HERE.
LET'S NEVER RUSH INTO WAR,
BECAUSE IT IS AMERICA'S SONS AND
DAUGHTERS WHO BEAR THE SCARS OF
WAR FOR THE REST OF THEIR LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: PLANNING FOR THE
GRANITE AND GLASS MEMORIAL NEAR
THE U.S. CAPITOL BEGAN MORE THAN
15 YEARS AGO.
THE PROJECT WAS ORGANIZED BY TWO
FORMER VETERAN AFFAIRS
SECRETARIES AND A
PHILANTHROPIST, TOGETHER THEY
RAISED MORE THAN $80 MILLION
TO COMPLETE THE PROJECT.
IT'S MONDAY MORNING IN HONG KONG
AND SEVERAL THOUSAND PRO-
DEMOCRACY PROTESTERS REMAIN IN
THE STREETS OF THE CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT, DESPITE A
WARNING FROM AUTHORITIES TO
DISPERSE BEFORE THE START OF THE
WORK WEEK.
SOME DEMONSTRATORS PULLED BACK
FROM POSITIONS OUTSIDE A
GOVERNMENT COMPLEX IN AN
APPARENT EFFORT TO AVERT A
CONFRONTATION, BUT OTHERS HELD
THEIR GROUND.
POLICE HAVE VOWED TO TAKE ALL
NECESSARY ACTION TO RESTORE
ORDER.
AFTER A FOUR-MONTH HIATUS, THE
SEARCH FOR MALAYSIA AIRLINES
FLIGHT 370 IS SET TO RESUME IN A
REMOTE PART OF THE INDIAN OCEAN,
ABOUT 1,100 WEST OF AUSTRALIA.
THREE SHIPS, SENT TO THE AREA BY
THE GOVERNMENTS OF MALAYSIA AND
AUSTRALIA, ARE EXPECTED TO SCOUR
THE SEABED THERE IN A PROJECT
THAT AUTHORITIES SAY COULD TAKE
ANOTHER YEAR.
THE PLANE VANISHED ON A FLIGHT
FROM MALAYSIA TO CHINA LAST
MARCH.
239 PEOPLE WERE ON BOARD.
IN SYRIA, ISLAMIC STATE
MILITANTS ARE CONTINUING THEIR
ASSAULT ON KOBANI, A TOWN NEAR
THE TURKISH BORDER.
BECAUSE OF THE FIGHTING, AN
ESTIMATED 160,000 SYRIANS HAVE
FLED INTO NEARBY TURKEY.
OVERNIGHT, U.S. LED COALITION
AIRSTRIKES TARGETED MILITANT
POSITIONS THERE.
THOSE STRIKES AND THE CLASHES
THERE LEFT AT LEAST 16 MILITANTS
DEAD.
IN NEIGHBORING IRAQ, ISLAMIC
STATE FIGHTERS REPORTEDLY
EXECUTED SIX IRAQI SOLDIERS IN A
TOWN 85 MILES WEST OF BAGHDAD
TODAY.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THE WAR
AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE LATER
IN THE PROGRAM.
IN BRAZIL, VOTERS FROM THE
BUSTLING STREETS OF RIO TO THE
REMOTE REACHES OF THE AMAZON
CAST THEIR VOTES TODAY IN THAT
COUNTRY'S PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
THE INCUMBENT, DILMA ROUSSEFF,
IS FAVORED TO WIN RE-ELECTION,
BUT IS EXPECTED TO FALL SHORT OF
THE 50% NEEDED TO AVOID A
RUNOFF.
THE RUNOFF WOULD BE OCTOBER 26.
BRAZIL, A COUNTRY OF 200 MILLION
PEOPLE, IS ESTIMATED TO BE THE
WORLD'S SEVENTH LARGEST ECONOMY.
IN MEXICO, FEDERAL SECURITY
FORCES HAVE UNEARTHED A MASS
GRAVE THAT MAY CONTAIN THE
BODIES OF MANY OF THE 43 STUDENT
PROTESTERS WHO HAVE BEEN MISSING
FOR MORE THAN A WEEK.
ON SATURDAY, OFFICIALS SECURED
THE SITE ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF
IGUALA, 120 MILES SOUTH OF
MEXICO CITY.
MORE THAN 20 CITY POLICEMEN HAVE
BEEN ARRESTED SINCE THE STUDENTS
WENT MISSING.
FEDERAL PROSECUTORS SAY THE CITY
GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN INFILTRATED
BY ORGANIZED CRIME.
AND WORD THAT WITHIN A YEAR THE
NAVY WILL DEPLOY ROBOTIC PATROL
BOATS TO TRY TO STOP ATTACKS
LIKE THE ONE THAT KILLED 17
SAILORS ABOARD THE U.S.S. "COLE"
IN 2000.
ACCORDING TO REPORTS, THE PATROL
33 FOOT INFLATABLE HULL BOATS
ARE ABLE TO DETECT THE PRESENCE
OF A POTENTIALLY HOSTILE SHIP,
SWARM AROUND IT AND DISABLE IT.
THE ROBOTIC SHIPS ARE ARMED WITH
50 CALIBER MACHINE GUNS BUT
LETHAL FORCE WILL REQUIRE THE
APPROVAL OF A HUMAN BEING.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW THE
SECOND INSTALLMENT OF THE
WEEKEND NEWSHOUR'S SERIES,
THE WAR ON ISIS.
EXTENDED CONVERSATIONS WITH
LEADING EXPERTS TO TRY TO MAKE
SENSE OF WHAT'S OCCURRING ON THE
BATTLEFIELD IN SYRIA AND IRAQ.
TONIGHT, WE ARE JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY DOUGLAS OLLIVANT.
HE SERVED AS A DIRECTOR WITH
THE NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
UNDER PRESIDENTS BUSH AND OBAMA.
PRIOR TO THAT, HE WAS A MILITARY
PLANNER IN IRAQ AND A
COUNTERINSURGENCY ADVISOR IN
AFGHANISTAN.
HE IS NOW A PARTNER WITH MANTID
INTERNATIONAL.
PARTNER WITH SO FIRST, LET'S
TALK TURKEY BECAUSE OF ITS
LOCATION AND ITS MEMBERSHIP IN
NATO.
IT LOOKS LIKE A CRUCIAL PARTNER
ON THIS WAR ON I.S.I.S.
THIS WEEK TURKISH PARLIAMENT
SAYS THEY WILL AUTHORIZE THE USE
OF FORCE IN SYRIA.
IS THAT THE KEY TO DEFEATING
I.S.I.S?
>> I DOUBT THEY'RE GOING TO SEND
GROUND TROOPS AND THE KEY TO
FIGHTING I.S.I.S.
QUITE FRANKLY WHAT THE COALITION
WOULD REALLY LIKE FROM THE TURKS
IS MORE ACTION IN SHUTTING THEIR
BORDERS.
TURKEY HAS BEEN THE CONDUIT FOR
MOST OF THE FOREIGN FIGHTERS
COMING IN TO FIGHT WITH THE
ISLAMIC STATE, AND IT WOULD
REALLY BE HELPFUL, WERE THEY TO
SHUT THAT BORDER DOWN VERY
EFFECTIVELY.
IT'S BEEN TALK THAT MUCH OF THE
MONEY FLOW IS COMING THROUGH
TURKEY SO MORE HELP SHUTTING
DOWN THESE BLACK MARKETS FOR
ANTIQUITIES, OIL, ET CETERA WILL
BE ASKED OF THE TURKS SHORTLY.
>> IF THEY DON'T SEND GROUND
TROOPS WHO DOES?
>> BOTH THE IRAQI ARMY, THE
IRAQI POLICE AND THE KURDISH
PESHMERGA FORCES.
THOSE ARE THE BULK OF THE FORCES
THAT WILL DO THE HEAVY LIFTING.
>> KOBANI, THE FIGHT HAS BEEN
CONTINUING THERE FOR QUITE SOME
TIME.
WHY IS THIS FIGHT SIGNIFICANT?
>> KOBANI IS AN IMPORTANT BORDER
TOWN.
ONE, KURD PUSHED OUT OF THIS
AREA YET KURDS PUSHED OUT OF
THIS AREA, IT GIVES THE ISLAMIC
STATE YET ANOTHER IMPORTANT
CROSSING WITH TURKEY THAT IT
WOULD CONTROL.
>> IS THE AIR CAMPAIGN FROM
AMERICA AND ITS ALLIES WORKING?
>> IT IS CERTAINLY HELPING.
GETTING ACCURATE REPORTING FROM
THIS AREA, DESPITE HAVING
CORRESPONDENTS JUST ACROSS THIS
AREA IS MURKY.
THE AIR ATTACK IS HAVING SOME
EFFECT YET THE ATTACK IS PUSHING
VERY HEAVILY TOWARDS THIS TOWN.
>> THE ANBAR PROVINCE, I.S.I.S.
CONTINUES TO MAKE GAINS THIS
WEEK, HIT AND KUBISA, THESE
GAINS ARE JEOPARDIZING AN
IMPORTANT MILITARY BASE IN THE
AREA AND THE CHROME OF A NEARBY
DAM.
TELL US MORE.
>> THESE HITS ARE IMPORTANT AND
THE ISLAMIC STATE SEEMS TO BE
MAKING EFFECTIVE MOVES IN ANBAR.
IN SHORT WE SEE THE BATTLEFIELD
IN FLUX.
THE ISLAMIC STATE IS BEING
PUSHED BACK IN SOME AREAS, WE
SAW MINOR GAINS BY THE IRAQI
ARMY AND IRAQI KURDS, WE HAVE
YET TO SEE A FULL CAMPAIGN AND
WE'RE SEEING MINOR FLUCTUATIONS
IN THE FRONT LINES SO TO SPEAK,
THROUGHOUT IRAQ.
>> HOW SIGNIFICANT IS THE
CONTROL OF THE BASE, AND THE
DAM?
>> THE CONTROL OF ANY BASE IS
SIGNIFICANT.
ANY TIME YOU LOSE A LARGE PIECE
OF INFRASTRUCTURE, THAT'S VERY,
VERY HARD TO GET BACK.
AND FRANKLY THAT'S WHEN WE SEE
THINGS LIKE THE ISLAMIC STATE
GETTING LARGE QUANTITIES OF
TRUCKS, LARGE QUANTITIES OF
OTHER MILITARY EQUIPMENT,
MISSILES.
SO WE DEFINITELY DO NOT WANT THE
ISLAMIC STATE TO TAKE OVER THE
SPACE.
>> WHAT'S THE SIGNIFICANCE OF
THE DAM THAT WE ARE NEARING
CONTROL OF?
>> YOU CAN USE A DAM POSITIVELY.
YOU CAN GET THE POWER THAT'S
COMING FROM FROM IT.
YOU CAN DIVERT THE WATER TO
WHERE YOU WANT IT OR CONCEIVABLY
YOU CAN USE IT AS A WEAPON OF
MASS DESTRUCTION WERE THEY ABLE
TO FLOOD THIS DAM THEY COULD --
CONTROL THIS DAM THEY COULD
FLOOD THE TOWNS BELOW THIS.
>> ARE THEY CLOSE TO GETTING
CONTROL?
>> I DON'T THINK THEY'RE CLOSE.
THEY ARE CERTAINLY THREATENING
IT BUT MOST OF US BELIEVE THAT
THAT REMAINS FAIRLY CERTAINLY
UNDER IRAQI CONTROL.
>> WE HAVE ALSO HEARD REPORTS IN
THE PAST FEW DAYS ABOUT THE
AMBUSH AND KILLING OF IRAQI
GOVERNMENT TROOPS JUST NORTH OF
THE CAPITAL CITY.
IS THERE ANY REAL THREAT THAT
I.S.I.S. COULD TAKE THE CAPITAL?
>> NO, THERE'S NO REAL THREAT TO
BAGHDAD.
THE NUMBER OF TROOPS THAT ARE IN
BAGHDAD IS VERY IMPRESSIVE.
AND WERE THE ISLAMIC STATE TO
GET CLOSE THE CITIZENS OF
BAGHDAD THEMSELVES I THINK WOULD
RALLY AGAINST THE ISLAMIC STATE.
THIS IS NOT LIKE THE NORTH,
WHERE THERE WERE SUNNI
CO--RELIGIONISTS, SOME OF WHOM
GAVE AID AND ASSISTANCE TO THE
ISLAMIC STATE.
AS THEY PUSHED INTO BAGHDAD WITH
ITS PREDOMINANTLY SHIA
POPULATION, THEY WOULD ENCOUNTER
A VERY, VERY HOSTILE ENVIRONMENT
AND PROBABLY BE THROWN OUT
FAIRLY QUICKLY.
>> ARE I.S.I.S. TROOPS ABLE TO
GO FREELY FROM SYRIA TO IRAQ TO
GET REINFORCEMENTS AND MOVE
TROOPS AND SUPPLIES?
>> I DON'T THINK THEY ARE MOVING
AS FREELY AS THEY WERE BEFORE WE
STARTED AIR STRIKES.
AND THAT'S BULK OF WHAT WE WANT
THE AIR STRIKES TO DO ON THE
SYRIAN SIDE, WE'RE DROPPING
BOMBS OR DESTROYING TARGETS BUT
IT'S LESS ABOUT DESTROYING
THINGS ON THE SYRIAN SIDE OF THE
BORDER THAN MAKING THEM UNABLE
TO ACT FREELY TO BE ABLE TO
REINFORCE IN THE MANNER YOU'VE
BEEN TALKING ABOUT, PUSH
RESUPPLIES, BE IT MATERIAL OR
TROOPS ACROSS THE BORDER.
THEY ARE STILL COMING, YOU CAN'T
CLOSE THAT BORDER BUT THEY CAN
NO LONGER COME IN CONVOYS OF 50
SUVS FLYING THE BLACK FLAG.
THAT'S NOT HAPPENING ANYMORE.
>> IS THERE ANY EVIDENCE THAT
ANY OF THIS PRESSURE IS APPLIED
TO MAYOR FINANCIAL
INFRASTRUCTURE -- THEIR
FINANCIAL INFRASTRUCTURE HOW
THEY ARE FUNDING THESE MOVES
INTO IRAQ?
>> IT DOESN'T APPEAR WE HAVE
FOUND A WAY TO FUNDAMENTALLY
CHOKE THIS OFF.
THEIR FUNDING SOURCES ARE SO
DISPERSED, THEY DO GET EXTERNAL
FUNDS WHICH WE CONTINUE TO TRY
TO CUT OFF.
BUT THEY ARE SELF-FUNDED, THEY
TAX THE VILLAGES THAT THEY'VE
TAKEN OVER.
WE'VE HAD A LOT OF AS I'VE
DISCUSSED EARLIER, THERE ARE
BLACK MARKET OIL SALES.
THEY HAVE TAKEN A LARGE ALMOST
INDUSTRIAL ANTIQUITIES MARKET,
THEY ARE LOOTING ANTIQUITIES ON
A GRAND SCALE AND MOVING THEM
ONTO THE GRAY AND BLACK MARKET
AS WELL.
STOPPING IS HARD BECAUSE IT'S
SO DISPARATE.
>> THANK YOU DOUGLAS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
ISIS' RELEASE FRIDAY OF YET
ANOTHER VIDEOTAPE SHOWING THE
BEHEADING OF A WESTERN HOSTAGE
ONCE AGAIN HAS DRAWN
INTERNATIONAL CONDEMNATION AND
REFOCUSED ATTENTION ON THE VERY
PRACTICE.
IN FACT, BEHEADINGS DATE BACK TO
ANCIENT TIMES.
AND TODAY, THEY ARE HARDLY
LIMITED TO WHAT ISIS IS DOING IN
IRAQ AND SYRIA.
THE NEWSHOUR'S IVETTE FELICIANO
TELLS US WHERE ELSE THEY ARE
OCCURRING AND TALKS TO A
RELIGIOUS SCHOLAR ABOUT WHETHER
THE KORAN OFFERS ANY
JUSTIFICATION FOR THE ACT.
>> Reporter: IN RAPID
SUCCESSION, ISIS' RECENT
BEHEADINGS OF AMERICAN
JOURNALISTS JAMES FOLEY, STEVEN
SOTLOFF, AND BRITISH AID WORKER
DAVID HAINES, SHOCKED AND
OUTRAGED THE PUBLIC, AND
PROMPTED AN AMERICAN MILITARY
RESPONSE.
>> IF YOU THREATEN AMERICA, YOU
WILL FIND NO SAFE HAVEN.
>> Reporter: AND NOW ANOTHER
BRITISH AID WORKER, ALAN
HENNING, HAS SUFFERED THE SAME
FATE.
A STORY THAT PROMPTED ANOTHER
ROUND OF INTENSE COVERAGE.
DESPITE THE WIDESPREAD COVERAGE
OF THE FOUR RECENT ISIS
BEHEADINGS, DR. DAWN PERLMUTTER,
AN AUTHOR AND SCHOLAR WHO FOR
YEARS HAS STUDIED RITUALISTIC
CRIMES AND RELIGIOUS TERRORISM,
SAYS VIDEO-TAPED BEHEADINGS ARE
NOTHING NEW, AND THAT THESE
RECENT EVENTS ARE ACTUALLY JUST
THE TIP OF THE ICEBERG.
SHE TOLD US JUST YESTERDAY, IT
WOULD BE SAFE TO SAY THERE HAVE
BEEN AT LEAST TWO DOZEN
BEHEADINGS AROUND THE WORLD
SINCE THE START OF SEPTEMBER.
AMONG THEM, FOUR PEOPLE KILLED
BY MEXICAN DRUG CARTELS, FOUR BY
AN EXTREMIST GROUP IN THE SINAI
PENINSULA, AND ANOTHER PERSON
BEHEADED BY BOKO HARAM MILITANTS
WHO POSTED THEIR OWN VIDEO JUST
THIS PAST FRIDAY.
FEW, IF ANY, OF THOSE INCIDENTS
EVEN MADE THE NEWS IN THIS
COUNTRY.
>> THERE'S HUNDREDS OF THEM.
HUNDREDS OF VIDEOS OF-- EASILY
ACCESSIBLE ONLINE FOR ANYONE TO
VIEW.
I GET ALERTS ON AT LEAST FOUR OR
FIVE BEHEADINGS A DAY-- IN-- IN
DIFFERENT PARTS OF THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: SHE SAYS THE
BEHEADINGS THAT HAVE OCCURRED
AFTER ISIS FIGHTERS OVERRAN
VILLAGES IN NORTHERN AND WESTERN
IRAQ AND IN SYRIA, HAVE TAKEN
VIOLENCE TO A LEVEL THAT EVEN
AL-QAEDA HAS CHOSEN TO DISTANCE
ITSELF FROM.
>> THE ONE CONSISTENCY IN ALL OF
THE FORMAL BEHEADINGS OF THE
DIFFERENT AL-QAEDA LINKED GROUPS
HAS BEEN THAT THEY HAVE NEVER
FORMALLY BEHEADED A WOMAN.
WHAT DIFFERS WITH ISIS IS THAT
THEY ARE BEHEADING WOMEN AND
CHILDREN AND STICKING THEIR
HEADS ON PIKES.
>> Reporter: WHY IS THE WAY YOU
CHOOSE TO KILL SOMEONE,
ESPECIALLY PUBLICLY, SO
IMPORTANT?
WHY BEHEADINGS OF ALL THE WAYS?
>> BEHEADING IS THE ULTIMATE
SIGN THAT YOU'RE IN POWER.
IT IS SO ORGANICALLY PRIMAL,
OFFENSIVE, AND FRIGHTENING THAT
IT'S EFFECTIVE.
PERLMUTTER BELIEVES ADVANCES IN
CELL PHONE TECHNOLOGY HAVE LED
TO WHAT SHE CALLS A "BEHEADING
EPIDEMIC" OVER THE LAST TEN
YEARS.
HUNDREDS OF VIDEOS HAVE BEEN
UPLOADED TO THE WEB BY GROUPS
SUCH AS THE TALIBAN AND AL-QAEDA
IN AFGHANISTAN AND IRAQ, AL-
SHABAAB IN SOMALIA, AND THOSE
DRUG CARTELS IN MEXICO.
>> ISIS HAS TAKEN THAT
TECHNOLOGY FURTHER BECAUSE NOW,
WE HAVE TWITTER.
WE HAVE INSTAGRAM.
IT'S SORT OF THIS UNBELIEVABLE
NEW PHENOMENON OF PRIMAL WARFARE
COMBINED WITH MODERN TECHNOLOGY.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, BEHEADINGS
IN THE FORM OF PUNISHMENT FOR
CRIMES GOES BACK CENTURIES.
IT WAS COMMON IN THE GREEK AND
ROMAN EMPIRES.
HENRY THE VIII HAD BOTH ANNE
BOLEYN AND CATHERINE HOWARD
BEHEADED, AND THE FRENCH
GUILLOTINE REMAINED FRANCE'S
STANDARD METHOD OF JUDICIAL
EXECUTION UNTIL 1981.
EVEN TODAY, BEHEADING AS A FORM
OF PUNISHMENT IS STILL ALLOWED
IN SEVERAL COUNTRIES INCLUDING
SAUDI ARABIA, YEMEN AND IRAN.
YET, SAUDI ARABIA IS THE ONLY
COUNTRY THAT ACTUALLY CONTINUES
TO BEHEAD OFFENDERS.
THERE WERE REPORTEDLY 80 PUBLIC
EXECUTIONS THERE LAST YEAR, MOST
OF THEM BEHEADINGS.
>> AS FAR AS COUNTRIES LIKE, YOU
KNOW, WESTERN COUNTRIES,
INCLUDING, THE UNITED STATES,
WHO HAVE EXPRESSED THEIR HORROR
OVER THE EXECUTIONS BY THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA, WE HAVEN'T SEEN THE SAME
HORROR OVER JUST REGULAR
BEHEADINGS THAT TAKE PLACE IN
SAUDI ARABIA, SEVERAL A MONTH ON
AVERAGE.
>> Reporter: ADAM COOGLE IS THE
MIDDLE EAST RESEARCHER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH BASED IN JORDAN WE
SPOKE TO HIM VIA SKYPE A FEW
DAYS AGO.
>> WHEN YOU TALK TO SAUDI
OFFICIALS ABOUT THIS THEY WILL
USUALLY TELL YOU THAT THEIR USE
OF PUBLIC BEHEADINGS IS ROOTED
IN ISLAMIC LAW AND ISLAMIC
TRADITION.
IF SAUDI ARABIA WERE TO TRY TO
REFORM THEIR PRACTICES ON
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT THEY WOULD
FACE A CONSIDERABLE RESISTANCE
AND THEY WOULD BE ACCUSED BY THE
CORE CONSTITUENCY OF YOU KNOW
BASICALLY GOING BACK ON THEIR
ISLAMIC ROOTS.
>> Reporter: SOME ANALYSTS SAY
MUSLIM EXTREMIST GROUPS LIKE
ISIS CHOOSE THE ACT OF BEHEADING
BECAUSE THEY'RE ALSO ALIGNING
THEMSELVES WITH WHAT THEY THINK
IS AN AUTHENTIC ISLAM, POINTING
TO KORANIC PASSAGES THEY BELIEVE
CONDONE THE ACT.
>> THAT'S WHY THEY HAVE TO
ALWAYS HAVE THIS READING OF
OFFENSES, IDENTIFYING-- HAVING
THE PERSON CONFESS, HAVING THE
PERSON IN FRONT OF THEM,
KNEELING.
IT IS AN EXECUTION RITUAL.
>> THEREFORE WHEN YOU MEET THE
UNBELIEVERS-- PRESUMABLY IN A
BATTLE-- SMITE AT THEIR NECKS.
>> Reporter: YET, ISLAMIC
SCHOLARS, LIKE PROFESSOR
KHALIDI, DISPUTE THAT THE KORAN
OFFERS ANY JUSTIFICATION FOR
BEHEADING.
HE CITES THE LINES COMING
IMMEDIATELY AFTER ONE OF THE TWO
USED TO JUSTIFY BEHEADINGS.
>> AT LENGTH WHEN YE HAVE
THOROUGHLY SUBDUED THEM, BIND
THE CAPTIVES FIRMLY.
THEREFORE IS THE TIME FOR EITHER
GENEROSITY OR RANSOM.
I'VE JUST READ SURA 47 VERSE
FOUR.
IF YOU CUT OFF THEIR HEADS
YOU'RE NOT GOING TO BIND THEM,
AND YOU'RE NOT BINDING THEM TO
CUT OFF THEIR HEADS, YOU'RE
BINDING THEM TO EITHER BE
GENEROUS TO THEM, RELEASE THEM,
OR HOLD THEM FOR RANSOM.
SO THERE IS NOTHING ABOUT
CUTTING OFF THEIR HEADS IN THIS
PASSAGE.
THE PEOPLE WHO ARE DOING THIS
ACT CLAIMING THIS AS
JUSTIFICATION FOR THIS PRACTICE.
IT IS NOT.
AND IT JUST SHOWS THAT THEY KNOW
NOTHING ABOUT ISLAM AND THEY
DON'T KNOW HOW TO READ THIS
PROPERLY.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
WHAT'S BEEN CALLED THE ISLAMIC
STATE'S "TACTIC OF TERROR,"
WATCH INTERVIEWS WITH OUR
EXPERTS ONLINE AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME OF
AMERICA'S BIGGEST, AND MOST
EXPENSIVE, CITIES ARE ACTING ON
THEIR OWN TO INCREASE THE
MINIMUM WAGE.
FOR SOME INSIGHT, YESTERDAY I
SPOKE WITH MATT FLEGENHEIMER, A
REPORTER WITH THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
NEW YORK IS SOMETHING SO DID
L.A. WHAT DID THEY DO?
>> SO NEW YORK AT LEAST ON
TUESDAY MAYOR DeBLASIO SIGNED
A LAW THAT STATED ON CITY
SUBSIDIZE ED PROJECTS THE WORKER
WAS ENTITLED TO A LIVING WAGE,
13.13, ANY TENANTS OR SUBTENANTS
THAT RECEIVE CITY SUBSIDIES, ARE
ENTITLED TO MINIMUM WAGE.
>> IF IT GOES THROUGH AND MAKES
IT THROUGH CITY COUNCIL, RIGHT?
>> NO, THIS IS AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER.
SOME CITY COUNCIL MEMBERS HAVE
CHAIFD OVER THAT.
>> ERIC GARCETTI, DID SOMETHING
DIFFERENT.
>> BROADER PACKAGE I BELIEVE
13.25 AND THEN FOR HOTEL WORKERS
IN A LOT OF CASES THEY HAVE GONE
FOR A SORT OF EXPANSIVE MOVE
THROUGH COUNCIL AS WELL.
WHICH HAS BEEN FACED BY
OPPOSITION OBVIOUSLY.
SOME OPPOSITION GROUPS SAY THIS
COST JOBS.
IN THE LONG RUN, IF EMPLOYERS
DON'T WANT TO PLAY THIS WITH
WORKERS THEY'LL TAKE THEIR JOBS
TO ELSEWHERE.
>> MOST PEOPLE DON'T RECOGNIZE
THAT LOS ANGELES HAS A FUJ
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY THERE,
AND THIS MINIMUM WAGE INCREASE
IF IT WENT THROUGH, IT WOULD
AFFECT A HALF A MILLION PEOPLE.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THERE'S A FACTOR OF L.A. BEING
THE BIGGEST INCOME DISPARITY
AMONG THE LARGE CITIES OF
AMERICA.
COSTING JOBS EVEN HIGHER PAYING
JOBS.
>> WHAT ABOUT THOSE BUSINESSES
ARE THEY PLANNING TO PUSH BACK
OR MOVE TO OTHER TOWNS?
THAT'S ONE OF THE ECONOMIC KIND
OF RESISTANCE TO INCREASED
MINIMUM WAGE IS THEY'LL STIFLE
JOB CREATION.
>> THAT'S THE DOOMSDAY PRE
PREDICTION, THE L.A. CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE, PARTICULARLY L.A. YOU
CAN MOVE ACROSS THE STREET AND
CHARGE A DIFFERENT WAGE THAN YOU
MIGHT HAVE, IF YOU WERE STAYING
IN LOS ANGELES.
>> SEATTLE GOT A LOT OF PRESS
FOR PUSHING IT UP TO $15 BUT
THAT'S A CITY THAT'S NOT NEARLY
AS IMPOVERISHED AS LOS ANGELES.
AVIATION IS THE CENTRAL HUB
THERE AND THEY MAY ACTUALLY MAKE
MORE THAN 15 BUCKS TO START WITH
RIGHT?
>> THAT'S ONE OF THE LEADING
CITIES BUT VERY GREATLY
DIFFERENT CIRCUMSTANCES AS FAR
AS THE INCOME SITUATION.
>> HOW DOES THIS PLAY OUT, WHEN
YOU LOOK AT THE OVERALL MAP,
THESE CITIES, IS THIS HAVING A
RIPPLE EFFECT, PERHAPS TAKE
ADVANTAGES IF THESE THINGS ARE
UNCOMPETITIVE FOR BUSINESSES?
>> IT SEEMS SORT OF EARLY IN
THIS KINDS OF CITY LEVEL
MOVEMENT I SPOKE WITH THE LABOR
SECRETARY TOM PEREZ EARLIER IN
THE WEEK.
HE SAID MOVEMENT ON THIS,
PRESIDENT OBAMA OBVIOUSLY CAME
OUT IN FAVOR OF A 10.10 MINIMUM
WAGE BUT THERE HASN'T BEEN A
MOMENTUM IN CONGRESS.
IT HAS TO BE ON A LOCAL LEVEL.
NEW YORK, L.A., CHICAGO, BEING
OTHERS, BUT EVEN IN NEW YORK
CITY THE MINIMUM WAGE IS SET AT
A CERTAIN LEVEL, THAT'S THE
MINIMUM, AND STATE WORKERS HERE.
>> AND MATT FLEGENHEIMER, THANKS
SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU: YOUR FEEDBACK
ABOUT SOME OF OUR RECENT WORK.
MANY OF YOU COMMENTED ON
FACEBOOK ABOUT OUR PIECE
EXAMINING FLORIDA'S NEW LAW
REQUIRING LOW-PERFORMING
ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS TO PROVIDE AN
EXTRA HOUR OF READING EVERY DAY.
A COMMON REACTION: PARENTS NEED
TO DO MORE TO HELP KIDS READ.
PATRICIA MARSHALL WROTE:
I ENCOURAGE PEOPLE TO READ,
READ, READ TO THEIR KIDS.
ONCE A CHILD LEARNS TO LIKE
READING, IT BECOMES A LIFELONG
COMPANION.
THIS SHOULD BE THE
RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENTS AND
OTHER RELATIVES, INCLUDING
SIBLINGS.
SANDRA MILLER ADDED THIS:
PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE AND
IT BEGINS BY READING TO INFANTS
DAILY.
ED WEIGANDT WAS MUCH MORE BLUNT
ABOUT IT:
HOW ABOUT PARENTS ACTUALLY DO
SOME PARENTING AND STOP USING
THE TELEVISION, X-BOX OR OTHER
ELECTRONIC GADGETS AS A
BABYSITTER?
FAILURE OF OUR KIDS TO LEARN ON
A GLOBAL LEVEL SHOULD NEVER BE
DEEMED THE FAULT OF THE
EDUCATION SYSTEM ALONE.
AS FOR THE PROGRAM ITSELF, SONJI
WEBB WROTE:
PERSONALLY, I THINK KIDS HAVE
TOO MUCH HOMEWORK.
I THINK THEIR SCHOOL DAYS ARE
TOO LONG AS WELL.
THEY NEED MORE KID AND FAMILY
TIME.
HELEN MARIE BRADY MARSHALL SAID
IT MADE SENSE:
ONLY IF THE CHILDREN ARE
ENCOURAGED TO READ BOOKS ON A
SUBJECT THAT INTERESTS THEM.
AND ROBERTO MARTINEZ ADDED THIS:
TEACHERS NEED TO ENGAGE IN
CREATING THE DESIRE TO READ, NOT
GIVING EXTRA READING
ASSIGNMENTS.
GREAT STORYTELLING ALWAYS LEAVES
LISTENERS CRAVING MORE.
FINALLY, THIS FROM ELLEN LESSE
GERSHENBAUM:
AS AN INNER CITY TEACHER, THE
ANSWER IS NOT EXTRA READING
TIME.
24 HOURS A DAY WOULDN'T MAKE A
DIFFERENCE!
THE ANSWER LIES IN THE EDUCATION
OF PARENTS SO THEY KNOW HOW TO
RAISE THEIR KIDS!
THEY ARE FIVE YEARS BEHIND WHEN
THEY ENTER KINDERGARTEN, AND
THAT CAN NEVER BE MADE UP.
AS ALWAYS, YOU CAN LET US KNOW
WHAT YOU THINK OF OUR STORIES,
ON TWITTER, FACEBOOK OR AT
newshour.pbs.org.
>> SO MORE NEWS BEFORE WE LEAVE
YOU TONIGHT.
MEDICAL AUTHORITIES NOW SAY THE
DEATH OF A FOUR-YEAR-OLD NEW
JERSEY BOY LAST WEEK WAS THE
RESULT OF ENTEROVIRUS 68.
IT'S BELIEVED TO BE THE FIRST
DEATH LINKED DIRECTLY TO THE
VIRUS.
THE VIRUS IS IN 43 STATES AND
HAS STRICKEN MORE THAN 500
CHILDREN.
AND JERRIE MOCK HAS DIED.
AT THE AGE OF 38 WHILE A
HOUSEWIFE SHE ACCOMPLISHED THE
FEAT OF FLYING AROUND THE WORLD
WITH SEVERAL STOPS ALONG THE
WAY.
ASKED WHY SHE UNDERTOOK THE
JOURNEY SHE ONCE SAID IT WAS
ABOUT TIME A WOMAN DID IT.
SHE WAS 88 YEARS OLD.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, HAVE A
GOOD NIGHT.